Catholic carpenter Robert Pearson started the first CPC in Honolulu in 1967 after abortion was legalized in Hawaii. Pearson said that "a woman who wanted to terminate her pregnancy 'has no right to information that will help her kill her baby.'" He formed the Pearson Foundation to help others start their own CPCs, offering detailed instructions for CPC management along with propaganda brochures and images to persuade pregnant women not to get an abortion. In 1968, the first network of centers was established by Birthright, in Canada. Alternatives to Abortion, today known as Heartbeat International, was founded in 1971. Christian Action Council founded its first center in Baltimore, Maryland, in 1980. Christian Action Council eventually would become Care Net. The CPC movement began as American Catholic activism, but after the 1973 passage of Roe v. Wade, interest in establishing CPCs widened to include American evangelical Christians.

To fulfill their mission of persuading pregnant women to forgo abortions, CPCs advertise and offer pregnancy support services. Among the more common ones are free pregnancy tests, prenatal care, screening for sexually transmitted infections, and adoption referrals. Some offer counseling, including religious counseling and post-abortion counseling. Some supply material support: clothing, maternity housing, food, financial support, and other supplies. Some offer training in such topics as budgeting, resume building, and child-rearing. An increasing number of CPCs obtain some form of medical certification to be able to expand their abilities and marketing; for example, permission to perform sonograms in an attempt to convince women to carry their pregnancies to term. In some jurisdictions, such the State of Louisiana, CPCs are considered safe-haven zones where parents may surrender custody of newborn infants. In 2020, one Texas chain of CPCs began providing contraceptives to unmarried women, stating that they wanted to help reduce unplanned pregnancies.
CPCs have been widely criticized by supporters of abortion rights for providing misleading and/or graphic information or content to patients to dissuade them from obtaining abortions. Their advertising campaigns have been criticized as being carefully designed to reach groups they perceive as being more inclined towards seeking abortion, such as young women, women of color, and those from lower socioeconomic backgrounds. Often, they place billboards near educational institutions and utilize public transportation and bus shelters for promotion. For example, Care Net's "Urban Initiative" specifically aims to attract Black and Latina women by advertising on platforms like the Black Entertainment Network (BET) and drawing parallels between abortion and historical instances of oppression, such as slavery. The British Pregnancy Advisory Service, an independent abortion-providing agency, warned about the lack of regulation on CPCs by the National Health Service in that young women were dissuaded from abortion without full knowledge of their legal options or the consultation of their family GP. CPCs have focused on what they call "underserved" communities in an attempt to lower the high rates of abortion in communities of color.

The overwhelming majority of CPCs in the U.S. are run by Christians according to a conservative Christian philosophy. As of 2007, two Christian charities, Care Net and Heartbeat International, accounted for three quarters of CPCs in the United States. Care Net, the largest CPC network in the United States, is explicitly evangelistic in nature, and says that its "ultimate aim [...] is to share the love and truth of Jesus Christ in both word and deed" and that its "pregnancy centers are committed to sharing the love of Jesus Christ with every person who walks through their doors." Heartbeat International, one of the largest CPC networks in the United States and also the largest CPC network in the world, runs "Christian crisis-pregnancy centers" and describes itself as a "Christian association of faith-based pregnancy resource centers" whose materials are "consistent with Biblical principles". The National Institute of Family and Life Advocates (NIFLA), which works with CPCs on legal issues, "strongly believes that sharing the Gospel is an essential part of counseling women in pregnancy help medical clinics". Some CPCs are run by the Catholic Church or by other church groups. Unaffiliated CPCs, or CPCs affiliated with other organizations, may provide a religious perspective in their counseling.
In contrast to the overt Christian perspective of most CPC networks, Birthright International has a stated philosophy of non-evangelism. A Jewish CPC organization, called In Shifra's Arms, also exists.
Many CPCs require their staff to be Christian. For example, as a condition of affiliation, Care Net and the Canadian Association of Pregnancy Support Services, the two largest CPC organizations in the United States and Canada respectively, require each employee and volunteer of a prospective affiliate to comply with a statement of faith. CPCs unaffiliated with either of these may also require staff to be Christian.
Religious activity is sometimes part of a CPC customer's experience. Care Net, which "is committed to presenting the gospel of our Lord to women with crisis pregnancies", claims to have effected over 23,000 conversions or restatements of Christian faith. NIFLA "strongly believes that sharing the Gospel is an essential part of counseling women in pregnancy help medical clinics". Some visitors to CPCs report that employees subjected them to unwanted evangelizing.
CPCs outside the United States are also frequently Christian. CareConfidential, the largest umbrella network for CPCs in the United Kingdom, runs "Christian-based pregnancy crisis centres" and is a division of the Christian charity CARE. The Canadian Association of Pregnancy Support Services, a similar network in Canada whose centers may also affiliate with Care Net or Heartbeat International, describes itself as a "Christian charity"; its affiliates "adhere firmly to Christianity". The United States-based Human Life International runs "Catholic pregnancy centers" in Mexico and also provides aid to the Centros de Ayuda para la Mujer, a network of CPCs in Latin America whose philosophy is "in conformity with the Magisterium of the Roman Catholic and Apostolic Church." As in the United States, unaffiliated CPCs may also be run by church groups or are otherwise Christian.

CPCs have been criticized for deceptive advertising. Some falsely advertise abortion services, attracting clients who wish to have an abortion. In the 1980s, investigative reporters from the Arizona Republic, the San Francisco Chronicle and CBS News, among others, filed stories about CPCs attracting women by offering free pregnancy tests but then presenting them with religious arguments and scare tactics against abortion. CPCs may intentionally locate near, and look like, abortion clinics; critics have also objected to CPCs' use of rhetoric and advertising language similar to those of abortion providers, such as "Plan Your Parenthood" or a directory listing under "abortion services" or "clinics". These, they say, may mislead pregnant women seeking abortion into contacting a CPC. In particular, the advertising approach of the Pearson Foundation, which assists local groups establishing CPCs, has been criticized by some other anti-abortion groups, including Birthright International, another CPC operator. The foundation recommends that a center seek out women who want abortions through "neutral" advertising, and refuse to answer questions that would reveal that they provide neither abortion services nor referrals to abortion services. Pearson, identified by some as the founder of the first CPC, said that a woman "has no right to information" that will allow her to have an abortion. In Ireland, when abortion was illegal except in circumstances where pregnancy endangered the mother's life and women often went to the United Kingdom to end their pregnancies, "rogue" CPCs, in contrast to government sponsored pregnancy centers, might falsely give the impression in their advertising that they referred women to Britain for abortions or otherwise provided information for women seeking to travel for abortion.
CPCs also use the Internet as a means of advertising. Some use search engine optimization to get their websites closer to the top of search results or bid against abortion providers to appear at the top of sponsored link sections on Google and Yahoo.
Heartbeat International, a Christian association that runs 1,800 crisis pregnancy centers, recommends that CPCs use two websites, one fundraising website that describes an anti-abortion mission to secure donors, and another website that purports to provide medical information to attract women seeking contraception, counseling, or abortion.
In August 2022, after a group of 21 Democratic senators criticized Google for displaying CPCs alongside abortion clinics in search and map results when users searched for abortion services, Google stated that they will now clearly demarcate whether a clinic "Provides abortions" or, when Google is unable to verify that the clinic provides abortions: "Might not provide abortions". Yelp stated that it will use new labels to differentiate CPCs into separate categories from clinics which provide abortions.

Nationally in the US, over $60 million in federal funds were given to crisis pregnancy centers, much of it coming from funding for abstinence-only programs provided under the conservative George W. Bush administration. Since the fall of Roe v. Wade in 2022, Anti-abortion facilities brought in at least $1.4 billion in revenue, with $344 million of that coming from the government. At least 16 states have agreed to send more than $250 million towards "alternative to abortion" programs from 2023 through 2025. The number of centers receiving grants is on the rise as grant amounts increased from $97 million in 2019 to 21 centers in 2022, receiving $344 million in federal grants. These grants included the Fema-funded Emergency Food and Shelter Program and the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF). By using these grants to support CPCs, funds are diverted away from the intended beneficiaries of TANF, thereby reducing the financial and structural assistance available to low-income families. Almost immediately after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v Wade, 38 Republican legislators in Wisconsin sent a letter to Governor Tony Evers, demanding that he provide $10 million in Federal ARPA funding to crisis pregnancy centers.
The proceeds from the sale of Choose Life license plates are also used to support Crisis Pregnancy Centers (CPCs) or other organizations explicitly opposed to abortion in 34 states. Of those 34 states, 19 of the states donate a portion of the proceeds raised to specific antichoice organizations or CPCs, 18 donate a portion of the proceeds to agencies or organizations that provide adoption assistance, counseling, training or advertising, one uses the funds raised by the plates to pay for roads and road repairs and 10 states specifically prohibit the allocation of funds raised by the sale of "Choose Life" license plates to agencies or organizations that provide abortion services, counseling, referrals or advertising. Motorists in these states can request these plates and pay between $25 and $70 on top of standard fees for the plate. A portion of the fee is used by the state to fund adoption support organizations and crisis pregnancy centers. In July 2013, then governor of Rhode Island Lincoln Chafee vetoed a bill for the license plates saying that in his opinion it violated the separation of church and state.
Since 2010, at least 13 U.S. states subsidized crisis pregnancy centers. These included Florida, Louisiana, Minnesota, Missouri, North Dakota, Indiana, Ohio, North Carolina, Georgia, Oklahoma, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Texas. They have funneled $495 million to CPCs. Efforts are led by anti-abortion Republicans. Some notable examples of the extent of these subsidies after the overturning of Roe v. Wade include Florida's increase from $4.5 million to $25 million and Tennessee's from $3 million to $20 million in state funding between 2022 and 2023.
Under the Trump administration, CPCs were encouraged to apply for Title X funding, which is intended to go to organisations offering family planning services. Funding provided through Title X for family planning services has historically been off-limits for abortion services. Certain healthcare organizations, such as Planned Parenthood, receive Title X funding for services like contraception, breast cancer and cervical cancer screening, and testing for sexually transmitted infections, while separate, non-Title X funds are allocated for abortion services. Most CPCs struggled to qualify because offering hormonal birth control, which many CPCs oppose, is a requirement to receive the grants. One CPC organisation, The Obria Group, was awarded millions in grants in 2019 after promising to provide those services in some clinics, despite not currently offering them. In 2019, alterations to Title X, commonly referred to as the "domestic gag rule," further tightened regulations, forbidding Title X providers from offering comprehensive pregnancy counseling or referring patients for abortion services. This prohibition meant that clients could not rely on their healthcare providers for accurate and thorough information regarding abortion. Although these changes were reversed as of November 2021, they prompted many grantees, including Planned Parenthood, which previously served about 40% of Title X-dependent patients for family planning services, to withdraw. Consequently, six states were temporarily left without Title X-funded services. This illustrates how political opposition to abortion can directly impede access to comprehensive reproductive healthcare services.

Some CPCs have been damaged or destroyed in several types of incidents, with some directly attributed to criminal action and others spurring further investigation. A suspected arson attack in 2016 against a CPC in Albuquerque, New Mexico, led to an FBI investigation; among the possibilities the FBI was investigating that the fire was a hate crime. On 1 February 2019, a CPC in Culpeper, Virginia, was vandalized with spray painted phrases that included "'fake,' 'you hate women,' and other vulgarities", spurring a police investigation. An arson attack against a Peoria, Illinois, CPC on 3 May 2021 caused $250,000 in damages. This attack came shortly after the declassification of a Department of Homeland Security document that categorized both anti-abortion and pro-abortion rights "extremists" as "domestic violent extremist groups".