No single diagnostic test currently exists to predict the likelihood of developing gestational hypertension. High blood pressure is the major sign in diagnosing gestational hypertension. Some women with gestational hypertension may present asymptomatic, but a number of symptoms are associated with the condition.
Symptoms

Edema
Sudden weight gain
Blurred vision or sensitivity to light
Nausea and vomiting
Persistent headaches
Increased blood pressure

Maternal causes

Obesity
Mothers under 20 or over 40 years old
Past history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension (particularly gestational hypertension) and renal disease
Pre-existing hypertension
Thrombophilias (anti-phospholipid syndrome, protein C/S deficiency, factor V Leiden)
Having donated a kidney
Pregnancy

Multiple gestation (twins or triplets, etc.)
Placental abnormalities:
Hyperplacentosis: Excessive exposure to chorionic villi
Placental ischemia
Family history

Family history of pre-eclampsia



There is no specific treatment, but is monitored closely to rapidly identify pre-eclampsia and its life-threatening complications (HELLP syndrome and eclampsia).
Drug treatment options are limited, as many antihypertensives may negatively affect the fetus. ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, and direct renin inhibitors are contraindicated in pregnancy as they are teratogenic. Methyldopa, hydralazine, nifedipine, and labetalol are most commonly used for severe pregnancy hypertension.
The fetus is at increased risk for a variety of life-threatening conditions, including pulmonary hypoplasia (immature lungs).  If the dangerous complications appear after the fetus has reached a point of viability, even though still immature, then an early delivery may be warranted to save the lives of both mother and baby. An appropriate plan for labor and delivery includes selection of a hospital with provisions for advanced life support of newborn babies.
Exercise during pregnancy can help prevent hypertension as it can improve not only health for the mother but also the child. Exercise can regulate the energy needs required during pregnancy while also decreasing inflammation. Regular exercise can also lower the increased stress levels associated with pregnancy.
There have been significant findings on how exercising can help reduce the effects of hypertension just after one bout of exercise. Exercising can help reduce hypertension as well as pre-eclampsia and eclampsia. There have been findings in recent studies suggesting that exercising according to recommended guidelines during pregnancy can reduce the risk of developing gestational hypertensive disorder by 30%.  The CDC recommends that during pregnancy, the pregnant women should exercise 150 minutes each week specifically focusing on aerobic activity at a moderate intensity.   
The acute physiological responses include an increase in cardiac output (CO) of the individual (increased heart rate and stroke volume). This increase in CO can inadvertently maintain the amount of blood going into the muscles, improving functionality of the muscle later. Exercising can also improve systolic and diastolic blood pressure making it easier for blood to pump to the body. Through regular bouts of physical activity, blood pressure can reduce the incidence of hypertension.  A recent meta-analysis presented that exercise interventions in pregnant women could reduce both systolic and diastolic blood pressure. The meta-analysis study found that exercise is more likely to reduce the risk of hypertensive disorder of pregnancy in women who are more prone to developing hypertensive disorders of pregnancy.  Risk factors that influence the likelihood of developing hypertensive disorders of pregnancy include, a maternal age of 40 or more, pre-pregnancy obesity, excess weight gain during pregnancy and gestational diabetes.  
Aerobic exercise has been shown to regulate blood pressure more effectively than resistance training. Compared to having a sedentary lifestyle, being physically active in aerobic exercise for 30-60 minutes 2-7 times a week significantly decreases the risk of gestational hypertension in pregnancy compared to a sedentary individual who is pregnant.  It is recommended to see the effects of exercising, that a person should aim for 5-7 days/ week of aerobic exercise. This type of exercise should have an intensity of light to moderate, utilizing ~85% of max heart rate (220-age). Aerobic has shown a decrease in SBP by 5-15mmHg, versus resistance training showing a decrease of only 3-5mmHg. Aerobic exercises such as jogging, rowing, dancing, or hiking can decrease SBP the greatest. The decrease in SBP can regulate the effect of hypertension ensuring the baby will not be harmed. Resistance training takes a toll on the cardiovascular system in untrained individuals, leading to a reluctance in prescription of resistance training for hypertensive reduction purposes.

