In a heterotopic pregnancy there is one fertilized ovum which implants normally in the uterus, and one fertilized ovum which implants abnormally, outside of the uterus.

In the general population, the major risk factors for heterotopic pregnancy are the same as those for ectopic pregnancy:

Previous history of ectopic pregnancy
Tubal surgery
Pelvic inflammatory disease
Use of an intrauterine device
In utero diethylstilbestrol exposure
Smoking
Women participating in an assisted reproductive program have an increased risk of heterotopic pregnancy for several reasons including: 

Higher incidence of ovulation due to treatment
Multiple embryo transfers
Technical factors in embryo transfer which may increase the risk for ectopic and heterotopic pregnancy
Higher incidence of tubal malformation and/or tubal damage in this group
Higher levels of estradiol and progesterone due to hormonal treatment



The goal of treatment is to preserve the viable intrauterine pregnancy and to remove the nonviable ectopic pregnancy. 
The standard surgical approach for removal of the nonviable ectopic pregnancy is by salpingectomy or salpingostomy.
In the case of an unruptured ectopic pregnancy, local feticidal injection can be used to remove the ectopic pregnancy. For this method, ultrasound is used to guide a needle to the ectopic pregnancy and substances such as potassium chloride and hyperosmolar glucose are injected directly into the gestational sac. The use of this method can be limited due the location of the ectopic pregnancy and the experience of the physician with this technique.  
Treatment of heterotopic pregnancy will depend on the specific location of the ectopic pregnancy, as well as the pregnant person's clinical presentation and stability.

Extrauterine pregnancies are non-viable and can be fatal to the mother if left untreated. However, successfully continuing the intrauterine pregnancy following removal of the extrauterine is possible and has a success rate of about 50 to 66%.

The prevalence of heterotopic pregnancy is estimated at 0.6‑2.5:10,000 pregnancies. There is a significant increase in the incidence of heterotopic pregnancy in women undergoing ovulation induction. An even greater incidence of heterotopic pregnancy is reported in pregnancies following assisted reproduction techniques such as In vitro fertilization (IVF) and gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT), with an estimated incidence at between 1 and 3 in 100 pregnancies. If there is embryo transfer of more than 4 embryos, the risk has been quoted as 1 in 45. 
In natural conceptions, the incidence of heterotopic pregnancy has been estimated to be 1 in 30,000 pregnancies. However, due to the increasing use of assisted reproduction technology, the overall incidence is 1 in 3900 pregnancies.