Most women with this condition present in the third trimester (although it can present as early as seven weeks) with itching without a rash. Typically, the itching is localized to the palms of the hands and soles of the feet, but can be anywhere on the body.
Hallmarks of ICP include the following symptoms:
Most common:

Itching, in particular but not limited to that of the palms of the hands and soles of the feet, without presence of a rash
Itching that is more noticeable in the evening
Darker urine
Less common:

Lighter stools
Increased clotting time (due to possibly associated vitamin K deficiency)
Fatigue
Increased nausea
Decrease in appetite
Jaundice (less than 10% of women)
Upper right quadrant pain
Not all ICP sufferers have all of the above symptoms.

The causes of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy are still not fully understood, but are thought to be caused through a combination of genetics, hormones and environment. Hormones, environmental and genetic factors are all thought to contribute to the condition.

ICP commonly occurs in the third trimester at the time when hormone levels are at their highest.
Twin and triplet pregnancies, which are associated with higher hormone levels, show a higher incidence of ICP.
ICP resolves quickly after delivery, when placental hormone production ceases.
Older high-dose estrogen oral contraceptive pills could cause features of ICP.

ICP is diagnosed by blood tests including a serum bile acid test and liver function test. While most pregnant women experience some itch from time to time, itching without a visible rash, or persistent or extensive itch symptoms should be reported to the midwife or obstetrician. As the level of itch does not correlate with bile acid levels (shown to be the most likely cause of stillbirth in ICP), the itch in ICP can range from being mild to severe.
To obtain a diagnosis of ICP, a liver function test and a serum bile acid test should be requested. Although the ALT level may be raised, 20% of women with ICP will always have a normal LFT test result. This, plus pruritus of palms and soles, could be considered as potentially diagnostic of ICP but only with elevated bile acid levels (however LFTs are not always elevated in ICP patients).  The serum bile acid blood test for ICP is a quantitative measurement of bile acids.
Other problems with the liver that occur in pregnancy should be considered by the treating clinician.  These include preeclampsia, the HELLP syndrome, and acute fatty liver of pregnancy.  Furthermore, other causes of hepatitis, like hepatitis viruses, cancer and certain medications, should also be considered.

Many providers will prescribe ursodeoxycholic acid. The most recent trial, PITCHES, did not show an overall beneficial effect, but some researchers believe that it may still be useful to offer ursodeoxycholic acid to women whose bile acids are > 40 μmol/litre. While there is no cure for ICP, and no way to guarantee a successful outcome, studies have shown a slightly better fetal and maternal outcome from administration of ursodeoxycholic acid, whereas cholestyramine appears to only relieve itching.
There is no evidence that giving oral water-soluble Vitamin K may help to avoid the risk of hemorrhage at delivery. However, experts in ICP will prescribe this if the woman reports pale stools, has very severe ICP (bile acids > 100 μmol/litre) or has a known clotting problem.
Delivery from 34 weeks may be important to reduce the risk of stillbirth, as a recent study identified the level of bile acids at which stillbirth risk rises. This research, published in The Lancet, also suggests that around 90% of women with ICP could wait until 39 weeks of pregnancy to be induced. However, this relies on regular bile acid testing with rapid return of results.

Maternal consequences include the following:

Itching, which can become intense and debilitating
Spontaneous premature labour when bile acids rise above 40 μmol/litre
Fetal consequences include:

Fetal distress
Meconium ingestion
Stillbirth
In most cases induction is typically recommended anywhere from 34 to 39 weeks.
In the United States, some researchers have suggested that the risk of stillbirth is lower if induction occurs at 36 weeks. Whilst Ovadia's research suggests differently, in the United States bile acid tests can take up to seven days to be processed, and this means that it may be more prudent to base delivery on the US research.