Terms used for the number of offspring in a multiple birth, where a number higher than three ends with the suffix -uplet:

two offspring – twins
three offspring – triplets
four offspring – quadruplets
five offspring – quintuplets
six offspring – sextuplets
seven offspring – septuplets
eight offspring – octuplets
nine offspring – nonuplets
Terms used for multiple births or the genetic relationships of their offspring are based on the zygosity of the pregnancy:

Monozygotic – multiple (typically two) fetuses produced by the splitting of a single zygote
Polyzygotic – multiple fetuses produced by two or more zygotes:
Dizygotic – multiple (typically two) fetuses produced by two zygotes
Trizygotic – three or more fetuses produced by three zygotes
Sesquizygotic – an egg which is fertilized by 2 sperms, which produce 2 fetuses
Multiple pregnancies are also classified by how the fetuses are surrounded by one or more placentas (chorionicity) and amniotic sacs (amnionicity).

In humans, the average length of pregnancy (2 weeks fewer than gestation) is 38 weeks with a single fetus. This average decreases for each additional fetus: to 36 weeks for twin births, 32 weeks for triplets, and 30 weeks for quadruplets. With the decreasing gestation time, the risks from immaturity at birth and subsequent viability increase with the size of the sibling group. Only as of the twentieth century have more than four all survived infancy.
Recent history has also seen increasing numbers of multiple births. In the United States, it has been estimated that by 2011, 36% of twin births, and 78% of triplet and higher-order births resulted from conception by assisted reproductive technology.

The frequency of N multiple births from natural pregnancies has been given as approximately 1:89N−1 (Hellin's law) and as about 1:80N−1. This gives:

1:89 (= 1.1%) or 1:80 (= 1.25%) for twins
1:892 (= 1:7921, about 0.013%) or 1:802 (= 1:6400) for triplets
1:893 (= approx. 0.000142%, less than 1:700,000) or 1:803 for quadruplets
North American dizygotic twinning occurs about once in 83 conceptions, and triplets about once in 8000 conceptions. US figures for 2010 were:

Twins – 132,562 (3.31%)
Triplets – 5,503 (0.14%)
Quadruplets – 313 (0.0078%)
Quintuplets and more – 37 (0.00092%)
Human multiple births can occur either naturally (the woman ovulates multiple eggs or the fertilized egg splits into two) or as the result of infertility treatments such as in vitro fertilization (several embryos are often transferred to compensate for lower quality) or fertility drugs (which can cause multiple eggs to mature in one ovulatory cycle).
For reasons that are not yet known, the older a woman is, the more likely she is to have a multiple birth naturally. It is theorized that this is due to the higher level of follicle-stimulating hormone that older women sometimes have as their ovaries respond more slowly to FSH stimulation.
The number of multiple births has increased since the late 1970s. For example, in Canada between 1979 and 1999, the number of multiple birth babies increased 35%. Before the advent of ovulation-stimulating drugs, triplets were quite rare (approximately 1 in 8000 births) and higher-order births much rarer still. Much of the increase can probably be attributed to the impact of fertility treatments, such as in-vitro fertilization. Younger patients who undergo treatment with fertility medication containing artificial FSH, followed by intrauterine insemination, are particularly at risk for multiple births of higher order.

Certain factors appear to increase the likelihood that a woman will naturally conceive multiples. These include:

mother's age: women over 35 are more likely to have multiples than younger women
mother's use of fertility drugs: approximately 35% of pregnancies arising through the use of fertility treatments such as IVF involve more than one child
Women conceiving multiples over the age of 35 increase the risk of having fetuses with certain conditions and complications that are not as common in women who are pregnant.
The increasing use of fertility drugs and consequent increased rate of multiple births has made the phenomenon of multiples more frequent and hence more visible. In 2004 the birth of sextuplets, six children, to Pennsylvania couple Kate and Jon Gosselin helped them to launch their television series, originally Jon & Kate Plus 8 and (following their divorce) Kate Plus 8, which became the highest-rated show on the TLC network.



Bed rest has not been found to change outcomes and therefore is not generally recommended outside of a research study.



