The management of labor and delivery may vary depending on the gestational age. It is common to encounter the following terms when describing different time periods of pregnancy.

Postterm – ≥ 42 weeks + 0 days of gestation (> 293 days from the first day of last menstrual period, or > 13 days from the estimated due date)
Late term – 41 weeks + 0 days to 41 weeks + 6 days of gestation
Full term – 39 weeks + 0 days to 40 weeks + 6 days of gestation
Early term – 37 weeks + 0 days to 38 weeks + 6 days of gestation
Preterm – ≤ 36 weeks + 6 days of gestation
Besides postterm pregnancy, other terminologies have been used to describe the same condition (≥ 42w+0d), such as prolonged pregnancy, postdates, and postdatism. However, these terminologies are less commonly used to avoid confusion.
Postterm pregnancy should not be confused with postmaturity, postmaturity syndrome, or dysmaturity. These terms describe the neonatal condition that may be caused by postterm pregnancy instead of the duration of pregnancy.

Because postterm pregnancy is a condition solely based on gestational age, there are no confirming physical signs or symptoms. While it is difficult to determine gestational age physically, infants that are born postterm may be associated with a physical condition called postmaturity. The most common symptoms for this condition are dry skin, overgrown nails, creases on the baby's palms and soles of their feet, minimal fat, abundant hair on their head, and either a brown, green, or yellow discoloration of their skin. Doctors diagnose postmature birth based on the baby's physical appearance and the length of the mother's pregnancy. However, some postmature babies may show no or few signs of postmaturity.

The causes of post-term births are unknown, but postmature births are more likely when the mother has experienced a previous postmature birth. Due dates are easily miscalculated when the mother is unsure of her last menstrual period. When there is a miscalculation, the baby could be delivered before or after the expected due date. Postmature births can also be attributed to irregular menstrual cycles. When the menstrual period is irregular it is difficult to judge the moment of ovulation and subsequent fertilization and pregnancy. Some postmature pregnancies may not be postmature in reality due to the uncertainty of mother's last menstrual period. However, in most countries where gestation is measured by ultrasound scan technology, this is less likely.

Once a pregnancy is diagnosed postterm, usually at or greater than 42 weeks of gestational age, the mother should be offered additional monitoring as this can provide valuable clues that the fetal health is being maintained.



Prevalence of postterm pregnancy may vary between countries due to different population characteristics or medical management. Factors include number of first-time pregnancies, genetic predisposition, timing of ultrasound assessment, and Caesarean section rates, etc. The incidence is approximately 7%. Postterm pregnancy occurs in 0.4% of pregnancies approximately in the United States according to birth certificate data.



== External links ==