According to the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission website, between the years of 2011 and 2014 there were forty-four cases filed for violating the Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978. The most common patterns of the violations often included:

The failure to equally promote pregnant people in the workplace
Refusal to hire pregnant people or quickly laying them off after the employer gains knowledge they are pregnant.
“Releasing workers who take medical leave for pregnancy related conditions” (U.S. EEOC)
“ Restricting pregnant people’s employment opportunities such as enforcing an involuntary leave because they are pregnant, limiting the number of hours that pregnant people are allowed to work, or not assigning them as many assignments because of their pregnant conditions” (US EEOC)
Employers creating clearances, often related to physical health, that are not required of workers who are not pregnant.
Appeasing non pregnant people’s accommodations, but failing to provide pregnant people the accommodation.
Not allowing lactating mothers to return to the workplace
Punishing employees who claim they or someone close to them experienced pregnancy discrimination.

The European Union regards less favourable treatment on grounds of pregnancy as unlawful, and the same thing as discrimination on grounds of sex (contrasting to the American case of Geduldig v. Aiello and consistent with the American approach in the Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978).
The European Court of Justice decided in Dekker v Stichting Vormingscentrum Voor Jonge Volwassen (VJV-Centrum) Plus that pregnancy discrimination was sex discrimination without any requirement for comparing this unfavourable treatment to a man. It reaffirmed this position in Webb v EMO Air Cargo (No 2) where a woman had been dismissed because she had attempted to take pregnancy leave, but had not disclosed this to her employer when hired. As well as a dismissal, a failure to renew a fixed term contract may also be discrimination. Furthermore, during any period of pregnancy or maternity leave there may be no detriment or dismissal in connection with a period of sickness. A woman is also allowed to shorten her maternity leave and return to work when she becomes pregnant again to get the second period of pregnancy, even though she is not fully able to carry out all her normal job functions.
It is also clear that women who are pregnant are protected at job interviews. In the Tele Danmark case a woman was held not to be at fault for not telling an employer she was pregnant while being interviewed for a job, despite knowing she was pregnant. However, a study published in The Netherlands is 2016 showed that 43% of active women experienced discrimination related to pregnancy of motherhood.

In Canada, pregnancy discrimination is considered a violation of sex-discrimination laws and will be treated as such.

Mexico and Japan have laws to combat pregnancy discrimination.

