Pregnancy is possible for transgender men who retain functioning ovaries and a uterus, such as in the case of Thomas Beatie. Regardless of prior hormone replacement therapy (HRT) treatments, the progression of pregnancy and birthing procedures are typically the same as those of cisgender women. Delivery options include conventional methods such as vaginal delivery and cesarean section, and patient preference should be taken into consideration in order to reduce gender dysphoric feelings associated with certain physical changes and sensations. It has been shown that historical HRT use may not negatively impact ovarian stimulation outcomes, with no significant differences in the markers of follicular function or oocyte maturity between transgender men with and without a history of testosterone use.
Among the wide array of transgender-related therapies available, including surgical and medical interventions, some offer the option of preserving fertility while others may compromise one's ability to become pregnant (including bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and/or total hysterectomy).

Pregnancy is not possible for transgender women as they lack a female reproductive system. As of 2019, uterus transplantation has not been successfully performed in transgender women. The Danish transgender painter Lili Elbe died in 1931 from surgical complications following an attempt at such an operation.
Uterine transplantation, or UTx, is in its infancy and is not yet publicly available. As of 2019, in cisgender women, more than 42 UTx procedures had been performed, with 12 live births resulting from the transplanted uteri as of publication. The International Society of Uterine Transplantation (ISUTx) was established internationally in 2016, with 70 clinical doctors and scientists, and currently has 140 intercontinental delegates.
In 2012, McGill University published the "Montreal Criteria for the Ethical Feasibility of Uterine Transplantation", a proposed set of criteria for carrying out uterine transplants, in Transplant International. Under these criteria, and because no research has been conducted in genetic males, only a genetic female could ethically be considered a transplant recipient. The exclusion of trans women from candidacy is justified by the lack of research to determine how to conduct the surgery, rather than an inherent bar. In 2021, authors of the Montreal Criteria published a revised set of criteria in Bioethics with an ethical framework for consideration of genetic males' (and other genetic XY individuals') eligibility for uterine transplants.

Non-binary people with a functioning female reproductive system can give birth.
Nonbinary people taking testosterone to transition must interrupt HRT in order to carry the pregnancy, as testosterone is a teratogen. Unintended pregnancies by non-binary people on testosterone therapy may be more common if they are on a low dose of testosterone. Nonbinary parents choose whether to be called "mom," "dad," or newly coined gender-neutral or nonbinary titles.
Non-binary people who have written or been profiled about their experiences of pregnancy include Rory Mickelson, Braiden Schirtzinger, and Mariah MacCarthy.

In 1583, an intersex person that had masculine gender expression reportedly became pregnant in Beaumaris, Wales.

In 2021, Unicode approved the "pregnant man" and "pregnant person" emojis in version 14.0, and added to Emoji 14.0.